<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLII: Hatherton</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-42" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Hatherton</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Charles Fairfield, in true Fairfield wrath, had ridden at a hard pace, which helped to keep his blood up, all the way to the bridge of Wykeford. He had expected to overtake the magistrate easily before he reached that point, and if he had, who knows what might have happened next.</p>
			<p>Baulked at Wykeford, and learning there how long a ride interposed before he could hope to reach him, he turned and followed in a somewhat changed mood.</p>
			<p>He would himself bail that woman. The question, felony or no felony‚ÅÝ‚Äîbailable offence or not bailable‚ÅÝ‚Äîentered not his uninstructed head. Be she what she might, assassin‚ÅÝ‚Äîdevil, he could not and would not permit her to lie in jail. Arrested in his own house, with many sufferings and one great wrong to upbraid him with‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith rights, imaginary he insisted, but honestly believed in, perhaps, by her‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith other rights, which his tortured heart could not deny, the melancholy rights which are founded on outlawry and disgrace, eleemosynary, but quite irresistible when pleaded with natures not lost to all good, and which proclaim the dreadful equity‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat vice has its duties no less than virtue.</p>
			<p>Baulked in his first violent impulse, Charles rode his hot horse quietly along the byroad that leads to Hatherton, over many a steep and through many a rut.</p>
			<p>Yes, pleasant it would have been to ‚Äúlick‚Äù that rascal Rodney, and upset his dogcart into the ditch, and liberate the distressed damsel. But even Charles Fairfield began to perceive consequences, and to approve a more moderate course.</p>
			<p>At Hatherton was there not Peregrine Hincks, the attorney who carried his brother, Harry Fairfield, whose course, any more than that of true love, did not always run smooth, through the short turns and breaks that disturbed it?</p>
			<p>He would go straight to this artist in all manner of quips and cranks in parchment, and tell him what he wanted‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe most foolish thing perhaps in the world, to undo that which his good fortune had done for him, and let loose again his trouble.</p>
			<p>Scandal! What did the defiant soul of a Fairfield care for scandal? Impulsive, reckless, affectionate, not ungenerous‚ÅÝ‚Äîall considerations were lost in the one compunctious feeling.</p>
			<p>Two hours later he was in the office of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝPeregrine Hincks, who listened to his statement with a shrewd inflexibility of face. He knew as much as Harry Fairfield did of the person who was now under the turnkey‚Äôs tutelage. But Charles fancied him quite in the dark, and treated the subject accordingly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôll send down to the jail, and learn what she‚Äôs committed for, but <em>two</em> will be necessary. Who will execute the recognizance with you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm certain Harry will do it in a moment,‚Äù said Charles.</p>
			<p>The attorney was very sure that Harry would do no such thing. But it was not necessary to discuss that particular point, nor to insinuate officiously his ideas about the county scandal which would follow his interposition in favour of a prisoner committed upon a charge involving an attempt upon the life of his wife, for the information brought back from the prison was such as to convince the attorney that bail could not be accepted in the case.</p>
			<p>On learning this, Charles‚Äô wrath returned. He stood for a time at the chimneypiece, examining in silence a candlestick that stood there, and then to the window he went, with a haggard, angry face, and looked out for a while with his hands in his pockets.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúVery well. So much the worse for Rodney,‚Äù said he suddenly. ‚ÄúI told you my sole motive was to snub that fellow. He chose to make an arrest in my house‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis d‚ÅÝ‚∏∫‚ÅÝd impertinence!‚ÅÝ‚Äîwithout the slightest reference to me, and I made up my mind, if I could, to let his prisoner go. That fellow wants to be kicked‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI don‚Äôt care twopence about anything else, but it‚Äôs all one‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôll find some other way.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôd better have a glass of sherry, sir; you‚Äôre a little tired, and a biscuit.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll have nothing, thanks, till I‚ÅÝ‚Äîtill I‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat was I going to say? Time enough; I have lots to do at home‚ÅÝ‚Äîa great deal, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHincks‚ÅÝ‚Äîand my head aches. I <em>am</em> tired, but I won‚Äôt mind the wine, thank you, my head is too bad. If I could just clear it of two or three things I‚Äôd be all right, and rest a little. I‚Äôve been overworked, and I‚Äôll ride over here tomorrow‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat will do‚ÅÝ‚Äîand we‚Äôll talk it over; and I don‚Äôt choose the wretched, crazy woman to be shut up in prison, because that stupid prig, Rodney, pleases to say she‚Äôs insane, and would like to hang her, just because she was arrested at Carwell; and‚ÅÝ‚Äîand as you say, of course, if she is insane she is best out of the way; but there are ways of doing things, and I won‚Äôt be bullied by that vulgar snob. By ‚∏ª if I had caught him today I‚Äôd have broken his neck, I believe.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGlad you did <em>not</em> meet him, sir‚ÅÝ‚Äîa row at any time brings one into mischief, but an interference with the course of law‚ÅÝ‚Äîdon‚Äôt you see‚ÅÝ‚Äîa very serious affair, indeed!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, see‚ÅÝ‚Äîyes, I suppose so, and there was just another thing. Believing, as I do, that wretched person quite mad‚ÅÝ‚Äîdon‚Äôt you see?‚ÅÝ‚Äîit would be very hard to let her‚ÅÝ‚Äîto let her half starve there where they‚Äôve put her‚ÅÝ‚Äîdon‚Äôt you think?‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I don‚Äôt care to go down to the place there, and all that; and if you‚Äôd just manage to let her have this‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs all I can do just now‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut its happening at my house‚ÅÝ‚Äîalthough I‚Äôm not a bit to blame, puts it on me in a way, and I think I can‚Äôt do less than this.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He handed a banknote to the attorney, and was looking all the time on a brief that lay on the table.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHincks, the respectable attorney, was a little shy, also, as he took it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm to say you sent it to‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat‚Äôs her name, by the by?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBertha Velderkaust, but you need not mention me‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly say it was sent to her‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs all. I‚Äôm so vexed, because as you may suppose, I had particular reasons for wishing to keep quiet, and I was staying there at the Grange, you know‚ÅÝ‚ÄîCarwell‚ÅÝ‚Äîand thought I might keep quiet for a few weeks; and that wretched maniac comes down there while I was for a few days absent, and in one of her fits makes an attack on a member of my family; and so my little hiding-place is disclosed, for of course such a fracas will be heard of‚ÅÝ‚Äîit is awfully provoking‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm rather puzzled to know where to go.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Charles ceased, with a faint, dreary laugh, and the attorney looked at his banknote, which he held by the corners, as the mate, in Mudford‚Äôs fine story, might at the letter which Vanderdecken wished to send to his long-lost wife in Amsterdam.</p>
			<p>It was not, however, clear to him that he had any very good excuse for refusing to do this trifling kindness for the brother of his quarrelsome and litigious client, Harry Fairfield, who, although he eschewed costs himself, laid them pretty heavily upon others, and was a valuable feeder for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHincks‚Äô office.</p>
			<p>This little commission, therefore, accepted, the attorney saw his visitor downstairs. He had already lighted a candle, and in its light he thought he never saw a man upon his legs look so ill as Charles, and the hand which he gave <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHincks at the steps was dry and burning.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a long ride, sir, to Carwell,‚Äù the attorney hesitated.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe horse has had some oats, thanks, down here,‚Äù and he nodded toward the Plume of Feathers at which he had put up his beast, ‚Äúand I shan‚Äôt be long getting over the ground.‚Äù</p>
			<p>And without turning about, or a look over his shoulder, he sauntered away, in the rising moonlight, toward the little inn.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
