<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Alice Maybell</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In the small breakfast parlour of Oulton, a pretty girl, Miss Alice Maybell, with her furs and wrappers about her, and a journey of forty miles before her⁠—not by rail⁠—to Wyvern, had stood up to hug and kiss her old aunt, and bid her good-bye.</p>
			<p>“Now, do sit down again; you need not be in such a hurry⁠—you’re not to go for ten minutes or more,” said the old lady; “do, there’s a darling.”</p>
			<p>“If I’m not home before the sun goes down, aunt, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fairfield will be so angry,” said the girl, laying a hand on each shoulder of kind old Lady Wyndale, and looking fondly, but also sadly, into her face.</p>
			<p>“Which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fairfield, dear⁠—the old or the young one?”</p>
			<p>“Old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fairfield, the Squire, as we call him at Wyvern. He’ll really be angry, and I’m a little bit afraid of him, and I would not vex him for the world⁠—he has always been so kind.”</p>
			<p>As she answered, the young lady blushed a beautiful crimson, and the old lady, not observing it, said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Indeed, I don’t know why I said young⁠—young <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fairfield is old enough, I think, to be your father; but I want to know how you liked Lord Tremaine. I told you how much he liked you. I’m a great believer in first impressions. He was so charmed with you, when he saw you in Wyvern Church. Of course he ought to have been thinking of something better; but no matter⁠—the fact was so, and now he is, I really think, in love⁠—very much⁠—and who knows? He’s such a charming person, and there is everything to make it⁠—I don’t know what word to use⁠—but you know Tremaine is quite a beautiful place, and he does not owe a guinea.”</p>
			<p>“You dear old auntie,” said the girl, kissing her again on the cheek, “wicked old darling⁠—always making great matches for me. If you had remained in India, you’d have married me, I’m sure, to a native prince.”</p>
			<p>“Native fiddlestick; of course I could if I had liked, but you never should have married a Mahomedan with my consent. Never mind though; you’re sure to do well; marriages are made in heaven, and I really believe there is no use in plotting and planning. There was your darling mamma, when we were both girls together, I said I should never consent to marry a soldier or live out of England, and I did marry a soldier, and lived twelve years of my life in India; and she, poor darling, said again and again, she did not care who her husband might be, provided he was not a clergyman, nor a person living all the year round in the country⁠—<i>that</i> no power could induce her to consent to, and yet she did consent, and to both one and the other, and married a clergyman, and a poor one, and lived and died in the country. So, after all, there’s not much use in planning beforehand.”</p>
			<p>“Very true, auntie; none in the world, I believe.”</p>
			<p>The girl was looking partly over her shoulder, out of the window, upward towards the clouds, and she sighed heavily; and recollecting herself, looked again in her aunt’s face and smiled.</p>
			<p>“I wish you could have stayed a little longer here,” said her aunt.</p>
			<p>“I wish I could,” she answered slowly, “I was thinking of talking over a great many things with you⁠—that is, of telling you all my long stories; but while those people were staying here I could not, and now there is not time.”</p>
			<p>“What long stories, my dear?”</p>
			<p>“Stupid stories, I should have said,” answered Alice.</p>
			<p>“Well come, is there anything to tell?” demanded the old lady, looking in her large, dark eyes.</p>
			<p>“Nothing worth telling⁠—nothing that is⁠—” and she paused for the continuation of her sentence.</p>
			<p>“That is what?” asked her aunt.</p>
			<p>“I was going to talk to you, darling,” answered the girl, “but I could not in so short a time⁠—so short a time as remains now,” and she looked at her watch⁠—a gift of old Squire Fairfield’s. “I should not know how to make myself understood, I have so many hundred things, and all jumbled up in my head, and should not know how to begin.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ll begin for you. Come⁠—have any visitors looked in at Wyvern lately?” said her aunt.</p>
			<p>“Not one,” she answered.</p>
			<p>“No new faces?”</p>
			<p>“No, indeed.”</p>
			<p>“Are there any new neighbours?” persisted the old lady.</p>
			<p>“Not one. No, aunt, it isn’t that.”</p>
			<p>“And where are these elderly young gentlemen, the two <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fairfields?” asked the old lady.</p>
			<p>The girl laughed, and shook her head.</p>
			<p>“Wandering at present. Captain Fairfield is in London.”</p>
			<p>“And his charming younger brother⁠—where is he?” asked Lady Wyndale.</p>
			<p>“At some fair, I suppose, or horse-race; or, goodness knows where,” answered the girl.</p>
			<p>“I was going to ask you whether there was an affair of the heart,” said her aunt. “But there does not seem much material; and what was the subject? Though I can’t hear it all, you may tell me what it was to be about.”</p>
			<p>“About fifty things, or nothings. There’s no one on earth, auntie, darling, but you I can talk anything over with; and I’ll write, or, if you let me, come again for a day or two, very soon⁠—may I?”</p>
			<p>“Of course, <i>no</i>,” said her aunt gaily. “But we are not to be quite alone, all the time, mind. There are people who would not forgive me if I were to do anything so selfish, but I promise you ample time to talk⁠—you and I to ourselves; and now that I think, I should like to hear by the post, if you will write and say anything you like. You may be quite sure nobody shall hear a word about it.”</p>
			<p>By this time they had got to the hall-door.</p>
			<p>“I’m sure of that, darling,” and she kissed the kind old lady.</p>
			<p>“And are you <i>quite</i> sure you would not like a servant to travel with you; he could sit beside the driver?”</p>
			<p>“No, dear auntie, my trusty old Dulcibella sits inside to take care of me.”</p>
			<p>“Well, dear, are you quite sure? I should not miss him the least.”</p>
			<p>“Quite, dear aunt, I assure you.”</p>
			<p>“And you know you told me you were quite happy at Wyvern,” said Lady Wyndale, returning her farewell caress, and speaking low, for a servant stood at the chaise-door.</p>
			<p>“Did I? Well, I shouldn’t have said that, for⁠—I’m <i>not</i> happy,” whispered Alice Maybell, and the tears sprang to her eyes as she kissed her old kinswoman; and then, with her arms still about her neck, there was a brief look from her large, brimming eyes, while her lip trembled; and suddenly she turned, and before Lady Wyndale had recovered from that little shock, her pretty guest was seated in the chaise, the door shut, and she drove away.</p>
			<p>“What can it be, poor little thing?” thought Lady Wyndale, as her eyes anxiously followed the carriage in its flight down the avenue.</p>
			<p>“They have shot her pet-pigeon, or the dog has killed her guinea-pig, or old Fairfield won’t allow her to sit up till twelve o’clock at night, reading her novel. Some childish misery, I dare say, poor little soul!”</p>
			<p>But for all that she was not satisfied, and her poor, pale, troubled look haunted her.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
