<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-64" epub:type="chapter">
			
<hgroup>
<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</h2>
<p epub:type="title">The March by Night</p>
</hgroup>
<p>
The next day the Sergeant was away in his gig to Wyvern, a long
journey, to report to the Squire, and obtain leave of absence from his
duties for a day or two. He was to spend that night at Hatherton, there
to make arrangements about the funeral.
</p>
<p>
It was a relief to all at Noulton Farm, I need hardly say, when the
master of the house was away.
</p>
<p>
A very sad day it was for the boy; a day whose gloom was every now and
then crossed by the thrill and fear of a great excitement.
</p>
<p>
As evening darkened he went out again to the garden in the hope of
seeing Tom Orange. He would have liked that cheer at the eve of his
great venture. But Tom was not there. Neither counsel nor
encouragement to be heard; nothing but the song of the small birds
among the leaves, and the late flowers, soon to close, peeping from
among the garden plants, and the long quiet shadows of the poplars
that stood so tall and still against the western sky.
</p>
<p>
The boy came in and had his lonely cup of tea in the “parlour,” and a
little talk with the somewhat sour and sad old servant. He was longing
for the night. Yearning to see Tom’s friendly face and to end his
suspense.
</p>
<p>
At last the twilight was gone. The night had indeed come, and the moon
shone serenely over the old gray roof and the solemn trees; over the
dead and the living.
</p>
<p>
The boy lay down in his bed at the accustomed early hour. The old
woman had taken away his candle and shut the door. He lay with his
eyes wide open listening with a palpitating heart for every sound.
</p>
<p>
The inflexible regularity which the absent master had established in
his household was in the boy’s favour. He heard the servant shut and
bar the outer door at the wonted hour. He saw the boy’s candle in his
window for a while and then put out. Tony was in his bed, and for
tired Tony to lie down was generally to be asleep.
</p>
<p>
Peeping stealthily from his lattice he saw the old servant’s candle
glimmering redly through the window on the juniper that stood near the
wall in the shadow; and soon that light also disappeared, and he knew
that the old woman had gone into her room. It was half-past ten. She
would be asleep in a quarter of an hour, and in another fifteen
minutes his critical adventure would have commenced.
</p>
<p>
Stealthily, breathlessly, he dressed. His window looked toward the
ozier trees, where Tom was to await him. It opened, lattice fashion,
with a hinge.
</p>
<p>
Happily the night was still, and the process of preparing to descend
perfectly noiseless. The piece of old rope that lay in the corner he
had early fixed on as his instrument of escape. He made it fast to
the bed-post, and began to let himself down the wall. The rope was too
short, and he dangled in air from the end of it for a second or two,
and then dropped to the ground. The distance of the fall, though not
much, was enough to throw him from his feet, and the dog in the
lock-up yard at the other side of the house began to bark angrily. For
a minute the boy gave himself up.
</p>
<p>
He lay, however, perfectly still, and the barking subsided. There was
no other alarm, and he stole very softly away under cover of the
trees, and then faster down the slope toward the appointed oziers.
</p>
<p>
There indeed was Tom Orange in that faint light, more solemn than he
ever remembered to have seen him before. Tom was thinking that the
stealing away this boy might possibly turn out the most serious
enterprise he had yet engaged in.
</p>
<p>
He had no notion, however, of receding, and merely telling the boy to
follow him, he got into a swinging trot that tried the little fellow’s
endurance rather severely. I think they ran full three miles before
Tom came to a halt.
</p>
<p>
Then, more like himself, he inquired how he was, and whether he
thought he could go on fifteen miles more that night.
</p>
<p>
“Oh, yes, he could do anything that night. Quite well.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, walk a bit that you may get breath, and then we’ll run again,”
said Tom, and so they set forward once more.
</p>
<p>
They had now accomplished about four miles more. The little fellow was
not so fresh as at starting. A drizzling rain, too, had commenced,
with a cold change of wind, and altogether the mere adventure of
running away was not quite so pleasant, nor even Tom’s society quite
so agreeable on the occasion, as he had fancied.
</p>
<p>
“You have done four out of the fifteen; you have only eleven of the
fifteen before you now. You have got over seven altogether up to this.
Not so bad. You’re not tired, youngster?”
</p>
<p>
“Not the least.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s right. You’re a good soldier. Now come, we’ll stand close
under this hedge and eat a bit.”
</p>
<p>
They supped very heartily on great slices of bread and corned beef,
which bore ample traces of the greens in which it had been served when
hot.
</p>
<p>
“And now, boy, you must get on to Hatherton by yourself, for I’m known
about here, and there’s a fair there in the morning, and there will be
people on the way before light. You must go a mile beyond the town, to
the George public. Mrs. Gumford keeps it, and there I’ll meet you.”
Then he detailed the route and the landmarks for the boy’s guidance.
“Take a drink of this,” said he, pulling a soda-water bottle full of
milk out of his coat pocket.
</p>
<p>
And when he had done—
</p>
<p>
“Take a mouthful of this, my hero, it will keep you warm.”
</p>
<p>
And he placed a flask of brandy to the boy’s lips, and made him
swallow a little.
</p>
<p>
“And here’s a bit more bread, if you should be hungry. Good-night,
and remember.”
</p>
<p>
After about an hour’s solitary walking, the boy began to grow alarmed.
Tom’s landmarks failed him, and he began to fear that he had lost his
way. In half an hour more he was sure that he was quite out of his
reckoning, and as his spirits sank he began to feel the cold wind and
drenching rain more and more.
</p>
<p>
And now he found himself entering a town not at all answering Tom’s
description of Hatherton.
</p>
<p>
The little town was silent, its doors and windows shut, and all except
a few old-fashioned oil-lamps dark.
</p>
<p>
After walking listlessly about—afraid to knock and ask anywhere for
shelter—worn out, he sat down on a door-step. He leaned back and soon
fell fast asleep.
</p>
<p>
A shake by the shoulder roused him. A policeman was stooping over him.
</p>
<p>
“I say, get up out o’ that,” said the imperious voice of the
policeman.
</p>
<p>
The boy was not half awake; he stared at him, his big face and
leather-bound chimney-pot looked like a dream.
</p>
<p>
“I say,” he continued, shaking him, but not violently, “you must get
up out o’ that. You’re not to be making yourself comfortable there all
night. Come, be lively.”
</p>
<p>
Comfortable! Lively!—all comparative—all a question of degrees.
</p>
<p>
The boy got up as quickly as the cold and stiffness of his joints
would let him.
</p>
<p>
Very dutifully he got up, and stood drenched, pale, and shivering in
the moonlight.
</p>
<p>
The policeman looked down not unkindly now, at the little wayfarer.
There was something piteous, I dare say. He looked a grave, thoughtful
man, of more than fifty, and he put his hand on the child’s shoulder.
</p>
<p>
“Ye see, boy, that was no place to sleep in.”
</p>
<p>
“No, sir, I’ll never do it again, sir, please.”
</p>
<p>
“You’re cold; you’d get pains in your bones.”
</p>
<p>
“I’ll not any more, sir, please.”
</p>
<p>
“Come with me, my boy, it’s only a step.”
</p>
<p>
He brought the boy into his house down the lane close by.
</p>
<p>
“There’s a fire. You warm yourself. There’s my little one in fever, so
you can’t stop long. Sit down, child, and warm yourself.”
</p>
<p>
He gave him a drink of hot milk and a piece of bread.
</p>
<p>
“You don’t get up, you know; there’s no need,” he added.
</p>
<p>
I think he was afraid of his pewter spoons. He kept the little fellow
nearly half an hour, and he lent him an old bottomless sack to wrap
about his shoulders, and charged him to bring it back in the morning.
I think the man thought he might be a thief. He was a kind man—there
was a balancing of great pity and suspicion.
</p>
<p>
The boy returned the sack with many thanks, in the first faint
twilight of morning, and set forth again for Hatherton. It was, the
fellow who directed him said, still five miles on.
</p>
<p>
At about a mile from Hatherton, cold and wet, and fearing to be too
early at the George Inn, the rendezvous agreed on, the tired little
fellow crept in, cold and wet, to a road-side pot-house.
</p>
<p>
At the fire of the ale-house three fellows were drinking beer. Says
one who had now and then had his eye on the boy—
</p>
<p>
“That boy there has run away from school.”
</p>
<p>
I cannot describe the terror with which the little fellow heard those
words. The other two looked at him. One was a fat fellow in breeches
and top boots, and a red cloth waistcoat, and a ruddy good-humoured
face; and after a look they returned to their talk; and in a little
while the lean man, who seemed to find it hard to take his eyes off
him, said, “That’s a runaway, that chap; we ought to tell the police
and send him back to school.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, that’s no business of ours; can’t you let him be?” said the red
waistcoat.
</p>
<p>
“Come here,” said the lean man, beckoning him over with his hard eye
on him.
</p>
<p>
He rose and slowly approached under that dreadful command.
</p>
<p>
I can’t say that there was anything malevolent in that man’s face.
Somewhat sharp and stern, with a lean inflexibility of duty. To the
boy at this moment no face could have been imagined more terrific; his
only hope was in his fat companion. He turned, I am sure, an
imploring look upon him.
</p>
<p>
“Come, Irons, let the boy alone, unless ye mean to quarrel wi’ me;
d—— me ye <i>shall</i> let him alone! And get him his breakfast of
something hot, and be lively,” he called to the people; “and score it
up to me.”
</p>
<p>
So, thanks to the good Samaritan in top boots and red waistcoat, the
dejected little man pursued his way comforted.
</p>
<p>
As he walked through Hatherton he was looking into a shop window
listlessly, when he distinctly saw, reflected in the plate glass, that
which appalled him so that he thought he should have fainted.
</p>
<p>
It was the marble, blue-chinned face of the Sergeant-Major looking
over his shoulder, with his icy gray eyes, into the same window.
</p>
<p>
He was utterly powerless to move. His great eyes were fixed on that
dreadful shadow. He was actually touching his shoulder as he leaned
over. Happily the Sergeant did not examine the reflection, which he
would have been sure to recognise. The bird fascinated by the cold
eye of a snake, and expecting momentarily, with palpitating heart, the
spring of the reptile, may feel, when, withdrawing the spell, it
glides harmlessly away, as the boy did when he saw that dreaded man
turn away and walk with measured tread up the street. For a moment his
terror was renewed, for Bion, that yellow namesake of the philosopher,
recognising him, stood against the boy’s leg, and scratched
repeatedly, and gave him a shove with his nose, and whimpered. The boy
turned quickly, and walking away the dog left him, and ran after his
master, and took his place at his side.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
